In this second example,
we are going to have
two components;
a linear trend plus a
seasonal component where
the fundamental period is four.
The way to build
this model, again,
is using the
superposition principle.
We first think about what
is the structure we need
to have a linear trend in
the FORECAST function.
The linear trend is
a linear function on the
number of steps ahead.
Whenever you have
that structured,
you are going to have a DLM
that is the so-called
polynomial model of order 2,
so let's discuss
first the linear.
Let's say the linear trend
part, and in this case,
we have an F and a G,
I'm going to call them 1,
F_1 and G_1 to denote that this
is the first component
in the model.
F_1 is just going to
be 1, 0 transpose,
and the G_1 is that
upper triangular matrix,
it's a 2 by 2 matrix that has 1,
1 in the first row, 0,
1 in the second row,
so this gives me a linear trend.
My forecast function,
let's call it f_1t in terms of
the number of steps ahead is
just a linear function on h,
is a linear polynomial order 1.
Let's say it's a constant
of K but depends on
t0 plus K_t1 h.
This is the structure
of the first component.
Then I have to think about
the seasonal component
with period of four.
If we are going to incorporate
all the harmonics,
we have to think again,
is this an even period
or a not period?
In this example, this
is an even period.
I can write p, which is 4,
as 2 times 2,
so this gives me that
m. I'm going to
have one frequency,
the first one, Omega 1,
is related to the
fundamental period of 4,
so is 2 Pi over 4,
which I can simplify and
write down this as Pi over 2.
This is the first frequency.
The last one is going to
correspond to the Nyquist.
We could obtain that
doing 4Pi over 4,
which is just Pi.
As you remember,
this component is going to
require a two-dimensional
DLM component model,
this one is going to require
a one-dimensional DLM
component model in terms
of the dimension here is
the dimension of
the state vectors.
When we build this
concatenating these components,
we are going to have, again,
let's call it F_2 and
G_2 for this
particular component.
I had called this here
a, let's call this b.
My F_2 has that E_2
transpose and a 1,
which gives me just 1, 0, 1.
My G matrix is going
to be a 3 by 3 matrix.
The first component is
the component associated to
that fundamental period.
It's a block diagonal again,
and I'm going to have
that J_2, 1 Omega 1,
and then I have my minus 1 here.
What this means is if I
write this down as a matrix,
let me write it here,
G_2 is going to be cosine
of that Pi halves,
and then I have zeros here,
I have my minus 1
here, 0, and 0.
I can further simplify these
to have this structure.
The cosine of Pi halves
is 0, the sine is 1,
so I can write this
down as 0, 1, 0,
minus 1, 0, 0, and 0, 0 minus 1.
Now if I want to go back
to just having a model
that has both components,
I use the superposition
principle again and
combine this component
with this component.
The linear plus seasonal
is a model that is going to
have the representation F,
G, with F is going to be
just concatenate F_1 and F_2.
G now has that block
diagonal form again.
If I look at what I have,
I have this block
that is a 2 by 2,
this block that is a 3 by 3.
Therefore my model
is going to be
a five-dimensional model in
terms of the state
parameter vector,
so this G is a 5 by 5,
and this one is also a
five-dimensional vector.
Finally, if I think about
the forecast function
in this case,
if I call here the
forecast function
f_2t for the component
that is seasonal,
I'm going to have my A_t1 cosine
of Pi halves h plus B_t1,
and then I have my
A_t2 minus 1^h.
My forecast function
for the final model
is going to be just the sum
of these two components.
You can see how I can now put
together all these blocks,
so I have a block that
is seasonal and a block
that is a linear
polynomial model,
and I can put them
together in a single model
just to create a more
flexible structure.
You could add
regression components,
you could add autoregressive
components and put together
as many components
as you need for
the forecast function to have
the form that you
expect it to have.
All of these models
are using, again,
the superposition principle and
the fact that we're working with
a linear and Gaussian
structure in
terms of doing the
posterior inference later.